Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
First question is, can you hear me through this?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So last time last week, we talked about syllogisms and
checking that syllogisms are valid.
NOTE CONF
And we looked at three forms of reasoning that we
can use to get from one sequence sequent from one
NOTE CONF
categorical statement to another.
We had the rule of double negation, which says that
NOTE CONF
if you know that A is true, then you know
that not not A is true.
NOTE CONF
And the other way round, we had our fundamental syllogism,
Barbara, which says that if A entails B and b
NOTE CONF
entails C, then A entails C.
And I think early on we agreed that that was
NOTE CONF
a pretty obvious piece of sound reasoning.
And then towards the end we talked about composition.
NOTE CONF
If you know that A entails B, then you know
that not B entails not A.
NOTE CONF
So this is the basis of proof by contradiction.
This works both ways round.
NOTE CONF
So if you know this, you know that if you
know this, you know that well, you put up a
NOTE CONF
few diagrams to illustrate it at the end, but you
can just look at it by a simple reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about what we looked at last week?
Or absorbed it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what we're going to do this week is go
NOTE CONF
on and look at the other syllogisms that Aristotle came
up with, some of which we agree with as modern
NOTE CONF
people and some of which we don't.
And so we'll discuss that at the end of the
NOTE CONF
week.
And then we will also talk a bit more about
NOTE CONF
negation.
So towards the end of last time, I talked a
NOTE CONF
little bit about this syllogism involving all snakes or reptiles.
No reptile has fur, so no snake has fur.
NOTE CONF
And we said that this looks just like Barbara.
It has not C instead of C.
NOTE CONF
So from our point of view where a negated proposition
is negated, predicate is just another predicate.
NOTE CONF
It's Barbara.
Aristotle didn't see things that name.
NOTE CONF
So that way.
So it had another name.
NOTE CONF
So at the moment we have these reasonings and the
idea that a negated predicate is just a predicate.
NOTE CONF
What happens if we take Barbara and splash negation symbols
everywhere?
NOTE CONF
That makes sense.
So here's Barbara itself.
NOTE CONF
Here's what we get by using not a instead of
a.
NOTE CONF
Here's what we get by using not C instead of
C.
NOTE CONF
That's what we saw before Here.
I'm using not A instead of A and not C
NOTE CONF
instead of C, and so on and so on.
So just by exchanging C for not C, a for
NOTE CONF
not a and b for not b, we have eight
different syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
From our point of view.
These are all the same because they all have the
NOTE CONF
same shape as Barbara.
But for Aristotle, these would all have been different.
NOTE CONF
And in fact, some of them wouldn't even count as
syllogisms at all for Aristotle.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about it from our point of view.
Do you agree that these are all basically Barbara or
NOTE CONF
we've done is change?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Anybody not agree?
NOTE CONF
Anybody think there might be something dodgy about this idea
that we can just change a predicate?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's about 98% not committed.
I'll assume that you will be committed.
NOTE CONF
So our principal of Barbara said, we have A, B
and C, and you can plug anything at all in
NOTE CONF
place of A and anything in place of B and
anything in place of C, and it still makes sense.
NOTE CONF
Now if we go back to Aristotle's time, he didn't
have a modern view of negation, as I've said before.
NOTE CONF
So he didn't actually think about the idea that not
A was a predicate.
NOTE CONF
Just like A is.
He did think about things like A entails, not B,
NOTE CONF
but he expressed it.
But he saw that as what he called a negative
NOTE CONF
statement about the positive predicate.
He didn't see it as A entails, not B.
NOTE CONF
He said it saw it as nothing.
That is, A is B, and you should think a
NOTE CONF
better.
Make sure that those two things mean the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at the eight possibilities here and
take out the ones that involve negations on the left
NOTE CONF
of predicates.
So here he didn't think about making statements like all
NOTE CONF
not Greeks, um, mortal.
Um, I mean, he could have said such a thing.
NOTE CONF
He would have said all barbarians immortal, but he didn't
express it as not Greeks.
NOTE CONF
So if you go back and look at a classic
pre-modern textbook with these eight syllogisms, you won't see any
NOTE CONF
of the ones that mention a negated predicate on the
left hand side.
NOTE CONF
So if we get rid of them, that only leaves
the two predicates we've seen already, which in the Middle
NOTE CONF
Ages were called Barbara and Enchiladas.
So that's the the classic one.
NOTE CONF
And that's the snakes and reptiles form.
How many more syllogisms could Aristotle come up with?
NOTE CONF
Well, Aristotle did have the kind of reasoning that we
looked at last time.
NOTE CONF
So he knew about contra position.
He didn't have it in quite as cleaner form as
NOTE CONF
we have it, but he did have it.
And so if you use contra position.
NOTE CONF
You can get another.
Three universal syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
So what we've got here is starting from the snake
and reptile one here.
NOTE CONF
I've done con for position.
B entails not C contra position is swap and negate.
NOTE CONF
So if I swap swap c and B and negate
them I get C and not be.
NOTE CONF
Here I've done a contra position on A and not
C swap.
NOTE CONF
Negate gives me C and not a, and here I
have done contra position on both of them.
NOTE CONF
So I've negated that and that.
So.
NOTE CONF
That gives me five sound syllogisms about universal statements about
all or every statements.
NOTE CONF
And again, if anybody is curious, these were called Cesaro
mayonnaise and chemistries.
NOTE CONF
Has anybody gone and looked up the names?
Well done.
NOTE CONF
You're still saying?
It can be shown.
NOTE CONF
And I think in one of the tutorials we will
ask you to look at the exercise in the book
NOTE CONF
that says show that this is true, that these three,
together with the two we've already seen, are the only
NOTE CONF
universal syllogisms.
That is, statements about syllogisms involving just all statements or
NOTE CONF
no statements.
So this is a no statement.
NOTE CONF
No A is C.
Sorry, no C is a um And those are all
NOTE CONF
the syllogisms about universal statements.
So we that's our complete reasoning set for categorical statements.
NOTE CONF
We'll go on to see more about these syllogisms in
a bit.
NOTE CONF
But first, any questions about what I did here in
this composition?
NOTE CONF
We're going to be doing a lot more composition in
a lot more different ways.
NOTE CONF
So it's going to be important that you get into
your heads what composition is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Maybe it would be a good idea to go through
one of the examples on the board.
NOTE CONF
So.
Here.
NOTE CONF
So here's Laurent.
Now, first of all, looking at this as a syllogism
NOTE CONF
in its own right.
Do you believe it as a piece of reasoning?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if I entails B and B entails not C,
NOTE CONF
then and it's not C, it's for us.
It's just Barbara.
NOTE CONF
But for Aristotle it was different because of the negation.
So what I'm going to do with the first one
NOTE CONF
here.
Is you'll see that it differs because I've done something
NOTE CONF
to the B and the C here.
So what have I done.
NOTE CONF
I must not go over there because it won't show
on the camera.
NOTE CONF
So try and get that definition into your head.
Um, it's how I remember it.
NOTE CONF
Contra position is a fancy Latin word for taking.
If p, then q and turn it into.
NOTE CONF
If not p, then not q.
And that reasoning those two things imply each other is
NOTE CONF
what you do when you do a proof by contradiction.
So if I do quantum position.
NOTE CONF
On this.
I swap.
NOTE CONF
So I put the two things on the other side.
And I negate them by negating b I get not
NOTE CONF
b by negating see I get not not see.
And then I use double negation to get to get
NOTE CONF
that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And similarly with the others.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any other questions?
Comments.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
So I could do quantum opposition to any or all
of the three of the premises and conclusion.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you go back to the full listing there,
you'll see that you can.
NOTE CONF
And look at that, you'll see that you have all
possible combinations.
NOTE CONF
So in some sense, composition is classical mathematical reasoning.
It doesn't change anything because a mathematical theorem that says
NOTE CONF
if and only if tells you that two things are
the same.
NOTE CONF
But you might want to think about things in some
particular way.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes you want to think about something in the
contrapuntal way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I want to go on and talk a little bit
NOTE CONF
about unsound syllogisms.
We've talked about syllogisms that are sound because we are
NOTE CONF
interested in formalising good reasoning, but there's an awful lot
of bad reasoning in the world, and so it's often
NOTE CONF
very helpful to understand when a piece of reasoning is
faulty.
NOTE CONF
So here is a piece of reasoning.
All snakes are reptiles.
NOTE CONF
No reptile has fur.
All snakes have fur.
NOTE CONF
And I hope you agree that this is a pretty
bad piece of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Everybody agree that it's a total rubbish?
Anybody not agree that it's total rubbish?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Anybody think?
NOTE CONF
Think of a way in a particular universe in which
my might actually be true.
NOTE CONF
And the sense is there a universe in which all
snakes have fur?
NOTE CONF
In which case it wouldn't matter that it's rubbish reasoning.
It's the statement all snakes have fur.
NOTE CONF
True in this room.
Okay, I'm hearing one answer and see.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if there were no snakes.
NOTE CONF
And I really hope there were no snakes in this
room.
NOTE CONF
And that's one of you has a pet that you
carry around, then all snakes have fur is true.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't matter whether the premises are true or
false or not.
NOTE CONF
But nonetheless, this is still an unsound piece of reasoning
because it only happens to work in that one particular
NOTE CONF
universe where there were no snakes.
It's not a good general piece of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
So how can we go about using our graphical technique
to look at it and see that it's an unsound
NOTE CONF
piece of reasoning?
How do you show that something is rubbish?
NOTE CONF
You demonstrate by example that it produces nonsense, and nonsense
usually means a contradiction.
NOTE CONF
So here's our Venn diagram set up.
Remember we were doing this last week.
NOTE CONF
Here's the diagram for A entails B that says there
is nothing in A that is not also in B.
NOTE CONF
So this region is empty.
This is the B entails, not C that says the
NOTE CONF
middle region is empty.
There isn't anything that is both B and C, so
NOTE CONF
if I plug these diagrams together and do the shading,
I get this.
NOTE CONF
And then remember what we do is pull out the
b, leaving a and C behind and let the white
NOTE CONF
paint flow over the boundaries.
So there's what happens when we pull out the b.
NOTE CONF
And if I now let the white paint flow then.
I have a diagram that looks like that.
NOTE CONF
And that is not the diagram for A entails C.
What is that the diagram for.
NOTE CONF
A entails not C no snake has firm, which is
what we expect.
NOTE CONF
So the diagram we got doesn't match the conclusion of
the syllogism.
NOTE CONF
How do we go further and actually demonstrate it.
We just need to come up with a particular universe
NOTE CONF
where it's definitely wrong.
And it's wrong if we can find something to put
NOTE CONF
there.
So if we can come up with a universe which
NOTE CONF
has something in there, then that bit of the diagram
says there shouldn't be anything in there, so it'll be
NOTE CONF
okay.
And there are plenty of universes where we can find
NOTE CONF
an example of a snake that has no fur.
Edinburgh Zoo is the nearest one.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's the nearest one we know about.
No doubt there are pet snakes kicking around.
NOTE CONF
Now, I asked you a moment ago, is there a
universe?
NOTE CONF
Where the syllogism is a valid statement?
And the answer was a universe in which there are
NOTE CONF
no snakes.
It should be noted that Aristotle would have disagreed with
NOTE CONF
us.
And we'll come on to why Aristotle disagreed with us.
NOTE CONF
Again, it's to do with something.
I've already mentioned the existential assumption.
NOTE CONF
But I thought it would now be useful just to
show how you prove that a syllogism is unsound.
NOTE CONF
Come up with a universe in which it is definitely
not not that valid.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about this demonstration of a bad piece of
NOTE CONF
reasoning?
Um, you don't need to do it graphically.
NOTE CONF
No.
So we do it graphically.
NOTE CONF
Fundamentally, we do it graphically because Michael Forman liked graphical
reasoning and it is quite fun.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm not really a graphical reasoner, so I do
it symbolically.
NOTE CONF
I just say, well, if A entails B and b
entails not C, and I just kind of think about
NOTE CONF
what combinations of universe will give me a counterexample.
Kind of advantage of this is that it steers you
NOTE CONF
to looking at the place where you have to put
the X and find an example.
NOTE CONF
So we look at the mismatch between this diagram and
this diagram.
NOTE CONF
And we see that there's a mismatch in there.
It's probably unlikely that you're going to do graphical reasoning
NOTE CONF
in your future careers, but it's quite fun for teaching
to other people, and some of you might go out
NOTE CONF
and teach stuff.
Um, an exercise that you might like to try.
NOTE CONF
Try.
Given that there are elections all over the place, or
NOTE CONF
have been elections all over the place recently, is go
and find some politician making some statement about how something
NOTE CONF
causes something else, and see if it falls into any
of the obvious categories of rubbish reasoning from a logistic
NOTE CONF
point of view.
Um, there is, of course, one candidate in particular in
NOTE CONF
the elections around the world at the moment, who is
notorious for an inability to reason.
NOTE CONF
So see if you can find an example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any other questions about this little example?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what have we done so far?
We have established five depending on how you count universal
NOTE CONF
syllogisms.
So that is syllogisms about statements of the form.
NOTE CONF
All A or B or no A is B.
Here they are all listed again.
NOTE CONF
Notice that these come in more or less equivalent forms.
If you look at this and this.
NOTE CONF
Then they look different.
But they're effectively the same because they're supposed versions of
NOTE CONF
each other.
So whether you can't 5 or 7 depends on how
NOTE CONF
you like to count.
And much of this is Aristotle.
NOTE CONF
So these are the five syllogisms that Aristotle recognised.
And these are variants of them.
NOTE CONF
If you look at these, which are all sound, then
you will note this observation.
NOTE CONF
Count how many negations there are in the syllogisms.
And if we look at them, you see everything has
NOTE CONF
either no negations or two negations, one in a premise
and one in the conclusion, one in the premise, one
NOTE CONF
in the conclusion.
Same there.
NOTE CONF
Same there and same there.
So Barbara is the basic one.
NOTE CONF
It has no negations.
Everything else has one negation in the premise and one
NOTE CONF
in the conclusion.
On the other hand, if we go back and look
NOTE CONF
at this unsound syllogism, it has only one negation.
So it's just got one negation here in the premise
NOTE CONF
positive and positive.
This is actually a general rule.
NOTE CONF
The sound syllogisms have an even number of negations.
The unsound syllogisms have an odd number of negations, so
NOTE CONF
that's a quick check to see whether a syllogism makes
sense or not.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let me summarise what we've done both last week
NOTE CONF
and so far.
We started with our fundamental rule, Barbara, and we applied
NOTE CONF
the two techniques of contra position and double negation.
And we got five sound syllogisms plus a couple of
NOTE CONF
variations about universal statements.
So all and no statements.
NOTE CONF
What is contra position?
Well contra position as I said it's negate and swap.
NOTE CONF
So we've done it applied to sequence.
So I take a entails B swap.
NOTE CONF
Negate gives me not B entails not a.
But we can do contra position on things more general
NOTE CONF
than just sequence.
Anywhere we have some kind of if then statement.
NOTE CONF
We can do a quantum position.
So if we think about.
NOTE CONF
Any particular reasoning, rule of reasoning or legal statement, then
we can do quantum position.
NOTE CONF
Here is a slightly perverse example which was dreamed up
by Michael Forman.
NOTE CONF
For reasons best known to himself.
I've adapted it a bit to make it slightly more
NOTE CONF
sensible than it was originally, but this is an example
of quantum position as a piece of legal reasoning, working
NOTE CONF
out what you're allowed to do.
So.
NOTE CONF
if you're over 18, I'll.
Curiosity.
NOTE CONF
How many under 18 do we have here?
Do we have under 18?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I was under 18 when I first got to
university.
NOTE CONF
It was a pain.
So sorry about the under 18.
NOTE CONF
We're going to forget you for the rest of this
example.
NOTE CONF
So in Scotland, if you're over 18, you can legally
buy alcohol between ten in the morning and ten in
NOTE CONF
the evening every day.
Now, if you're in England, this time, restriction doesn't apply.
NOTE CONF
I could go into a political rant about the Scottish
nanny state, or I could not very hard on people
NOTE CONF
who are going to work and need to buy a
bottle of wine for the dinner party in the evening.
NOTE CONF
But Scotland has this restriction.
The original motivation for the restriction is to try to
NOTE CONF
have some gap in which people can't continue being drunk.
So in our current universe, the following rule of fact
NOTE CONF
holds if you're in Scotland and the time is between
10 and 10, then you can legally buy alcohol.
NOTE CONF
Now notice this is a piece of informal reasoning.
I haven't turned it into a piece of formal logic
NOTE CONF
and specified my universe exactly.
If we were going to do that, we would have
NOTE CONF
a bit of work to do.
Because who is in Scotland?
NOTE CONF
What is Scotland anyway?
What is the time frame?
NOTE CONF
Who is it?
Who's doing legally?
NOTE CONF
Buying alcohol?
So really my universe here is composed of triples of
NOTE CONF
a person, a place and a time.
But that's a bit of a pain to think about.
NOTE CONF
So I just reason in English and forget about it.
But do think about how you would write this down
NOTE CONF
formally in symbols and what the arguments of your predicates
would be.
NOTE CONF
Notice this is not a sound rule.
This is not a universally true rule of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
It's a rule that is true in Scottish law, which
for various reasons is a particular universe that matters to
NOTE CONF
us.
So suppose I start doing some negation.
NOTE CONF
Here are a couple of statements that I've done by
doing something or other to this rule.
NOTE CONF
If I take the first one.
If I'm in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
And I cannot legally buy alcohol, what do I know?
What can I infer?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's night time by the very broad Scottish definition of
NOTE CONF
Night-Time.
And what what's going on here?
NOTE CONF
So if you look at these two, what I've really
done is composition.
NOTE CONF
I've looked at this one and this one and I've
swapped them around and negated them.
NOTE CONF
So here I've done a negation by putting a knot
sign in.
NOTE CONF
And here I've done a negation by saying, well, I
know that the opposite of between 10 and 22 is
NOTE CONF
between 22 and 10, which is a fact about how
we represent times.
NOTE CONF
So again, there's domain knowledge, linguistic knowledge going on in
this piece of reasoning, not just pure logic.
NOTE CONF
Um, this relates to a question somebody was asking me
on Piazza, which is is unsuccessful, the same as not
NOTE CONF
successful.
And in most contexts it is.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's the other example.
If it's daytime and I can't legally buy alcohol, what
NOTE CONF
can I conclude?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Not in Scotland.
There are many places in the world where this is
NOTE CONF
true.
Um, not England, of course, but many other places.
NOTE CONF
So again, this is an example of contra position because
I've started from the basic rule and I have swapped
NOTE CONF
these two.
Negated by alcohol and negated in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
So here's an example of composition as something that lets
you manipulate laws.
NOTE CONF
If you are actually doing legal reasoning, most of you
probably don't do much legal reasoning right now.
NOTE CONF
But at some point you're going to enter a world
where you have to.
NOTE CONF
In particular, you're going to have to reason about taxes
and which taxes you have to pay.
NOTE CONF
And tax law is a fascinating subject because it's really
quite formally written in documents, many hundreds of pages long.
NOTE CONF
And at some point you do have to start doing
this kind of reasoning to work out whether you owe
NOTE CONF
tax or not, because people who write tax laws are
extremely fond of things that go like this will applies
NOTE CONF
unless these three things happen and an exception to these
three things happening is and so on.
NOTE CONF
So the reasoning can be quite subtle and quite expensive
to get wrong.
NOTE CONF
Um, and let me pass on to you one piece
of advice from my father.
NOTE CONF
Never, ever annoy Her Majesty's revenue and Customs, because they
can make your life miserable for so long, in so
NOTE CONF
many ways that you just don't want to go there.
Slightly less miserable than some other countries.
NOTE CONF
Revenue departments will make it, but still pretty miserable.
So let's get back.
NOTE CONF
To a bit of abstraction.
Well, maybe let's first take questions.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about this as a piece of reasoning?
Um.
NOTE CONF
So how is it different?
That's a very good question because you've detected, I think,
NOTE CONF
what it is that makes me a bit unhappy about
this section of the course, because really we're looking at
NOTE CONF
kind of propositional statements, aren't we?
We're addressing them up to look like rules.
NOTE CONF
But if I wrote.
I could write them as propositional statements.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So it's actually going to become apparent that everything we
NOTE CONF
do is just something that works at many levels.
So this isn't.
NOTE CONF
Radically different.
It's just an example of of composition being used with
NOTE CONF
a different format of premises.
So here I've written Marta's rules in the same way
NOTE CONF
that we did on the previous slide where I was
negating sequence.
NOTE CONF
So the main point is that composition is very general
thing.
NOTE CONF
It applies at all levels of reasoning.
You can do it on simple propositional statements.
NOTE CONF
P implies q is the same as not q implies
p.
NOTE CONF
You can do it at the level of sequence A
entails.
NOTE CONF
B is the same as not B entails not A,
and you can do it at the level of rules
NOTE CONF
like this where you have um, p and q and
then r follows.
NOTE CONF
Then you can do composition across those as well.
The other point of course, is that here we have
NOTE CONF
two premises and one conclusion, and I can do quantum
position with the conclusion and one premise at a time.
NOTE CONF
So again, we'll think about that in more detail later.
And the full answer to the question will become apparent
NOTE CONF
in a week or two.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Can I do a quantum position on the two premises?
No, because contra position is about things that are in
NOTE CONF
an if then relationship.
And this vertical line is serving the purpose of an
NOTE CONF
if then statement.
So if I were to do swap and negate on
NOTE CONF
the two premises, that would amount to negating both the
premises, which is undecided thing to do.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So having set up composition as this very useful thing,
NOTE CONF
let's get back to the more symbolic representation and think
about, um, what we can do with Barbara.
NOTE CONF
Um, incidentally, how many of you noticed that I'm saying
contra posing instead of contra posing?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Who thinks I'm being a pretentious idiot by doing so?
NOTE CONF
Somebody should.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's a curious thing.
It's essentially because of the way Latin worked.
NOTE CONF
Um, the.
If you are following Latin etymology, then the verb ought
NOTE CONF
to be contra pone.
But then in that case we ought to be saying
NOTE CONF
or pone instead of oppose and such like.
And for bizarre historical reasons, logicians have sometimes decided to
NOTE CONF
say contraption instead of contra pose.
Maybe because contra pose is something we use as a
NOTE CONF
normal English word to put two things next to each
other, whereas this is a different use.
NOTE CONF
So because I quite like Latin and because I am
a pretentious get some of the time, I'm continuing to
NOTE CONF
say contraption, but don't feel you have to if you
find it obnoxious.
NOTE CONF
So if we take Barbara, then we've got the rules
and tells B, B, and Tlca entail C.
NOTE CONF
Each of these things is something that can be negated.
So we can take this rule and do composition on
NOTE CONF
it.
So we can say instead of negating the sequence of
NOTE CONF
the individual sequent, we swap those about as we did
in the Scottish law example on the previous slide.
NOTE CONF
Now if I swap and negate to sequence, what is
it I'm negating?
NOTE CONF
I'm not negating the predicates.
So I'm not adding negations there.
NOTE CONF
That's something different.
What I'm doing is negating the whole sequence.
NOTE CONF
So I'm saying here A does not entail C.
Or, to put.
NOTE CONF
It another way.
Um, a does not entail C.
NOTE CONF
What does A does not entail C mean it means
there is a C that is not a.
NOTE CONF
And I can do that on the left or the
right.
NOTE CONF
So I could take this conclusion and I could contraption
it with that premise to give that or with that
NOTE CONF
premise to give that.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What do these look like?
In terms of diagrams, we have statements like this.
NOTE CONF
So this is the every a is BA entails B.
What does A does not entail C mean it means
NOTE CONF
some a is not See, there is an A, there
is not see.
NOTE CONF
So now we've left the the realm of universal statements.
And we're talking about existential statements, things that assert the
NOTE CONF
existence of something which we haven't done any reasoning for
so far.
NOTE CONF
And actually, in much of the time we want to
say that something does exist, something there is something which
NOTE CONF
is true, which has some nice property.
So here are some questions which we can think about.
NOTE CONF
I think we can think about them now because I
have a few minutes.
NOTE CONF
So think about this.
I said I could do contradiction between the conclusion And
NOTE CONF
one premise.
Or I could do it between that conclusion and that
NOTE CONF
premise.
What would happen if I did it with both premises?
NOTE CONF
Would I get something that is sound, or would I
get something that doesn't work?
NOTE CONF
What would the what would it even mean?
Because I can't swap the premise with both conclusions.
NOTE CONF
Maybe related question is I've been cheerfully writing all these
syllogisms with two premises.
NOTE CONF
This one and this one.
Again, somebody asked on Piazza, unfortunately, in a private question,
NOTE CONF
I think, does it matter which way round the premises
are?
NOTE CONF
Um, does it matter which way round I write the
premises.
NOTE CONF
If I wrote B and tail C and tails B
and tail C, would it matter?
NOTE CONF
No, I mean they're just premises, right?
Well, they have the same status.
NOTE CONF
And again, this is something that is true for us
as modern logicians.
NOTE CONF
But in the classical presentation these two things were distinguished.
So they would talk about a major premise and a
NOTE CONF
minor premise.
And I can never remember which one is which.
NOTE CONF
So I think that this is the major premise and
this is the minor premise, but I'm not sure.
NOTE CONF
And who cares because we have modern logic.
Um.
NOTE CONF
If we were allowing ourselves more notational freedom and we
could combine lots of things with logic.
NOTE CONF
What is the symbol that we would write between these
two premises to express their relation?
NOTE CONF
And what we're really saying is, if this is true
and this is true, then this is true.
NOTE CONF
So then I think now we're at a little exercise
for next time.
NOTE CONF
Go away and think a little about if I started
putting ands in here, what would happen?
NOTE CONF
Suppose I could combine these with an and we haven't
talked about combining sequence like that.
NOTE CONF
We're going to later week 4 or 5.
But if we could combine these two sequence by saying
NOTE CONF
A entails B and b entails C.
And that was just one premise.
NOTE CONF
What would happen if we then did contra position with
the conclusion?
NOTE CONF
So for those of you who are wanting to stretch
a bit.
NOTE CONF
Think about that.
See if you can work out what happens next.
NOTE CONF
Again, we will see you in about two weeks time.
Another thing that you can think about before tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
I've got an awful lot of different ways of writing
if then statements.
NOTE CONF
So back in the propositional logic I had a implies
b that was the plain ordinary.
NOTE CONF
If the moon is made of green cheese, then I
am a banana.
NOTE CONF
Statement.
Propositional logic.
NOTE CONF
We have been working with A entails B, and remember
that this is not a simple propositional statement because it
NOTE CONF
has an implicit quantifier in there.
It says for every x a of x implies b
NOTE CONF
of x.
And actually we have yet another form of implication because
NOTE CONF
we have the form of implication that says if the
premises are true, then the conclusion is true.
NOTE CONF
So we've got at least three different kinds of if
then kicking around.
NOTE CONF
So have a bit of a think about what the
relationship between them is.
NOTE CONF
And I think that's a good point to stop for
today.
NOTE CONF
Um, don't try to answer these questions now.
They're just something to think about.
NOTE CONF
They're more philosophical than technical.
Any final questions about today?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I will see you tomorrow and hope that I
NOTE CONF
can speak a bit better.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
This is, by the way, my first ever attack of
Covid.
NOTE CONF
Managed to escape it for four years.